- [Instructor] The OAuth two standard does leave a bit
of a gap because it's solely focused on authorization.
The standard does not provide any guidance
on how to identify or authenticate end-users.
To fill this gap, OpenID Connect was introduced.
OpenID Connect is a thin identity layer
that sits on top of OAuth.
The standard describes how capabilities like authentication
and user profile information are delivered
using an authentication request, an ID token
and a user info endpoint.
OpenID Connect or OIDC,
establishes a standalone identity provider that is separate
from the client application.
The architecture allows multiple client applications
to leverage the same identity service for authentication.
This is opposed to each one building their own
and storing credentials.
You've probably seen this scenario before.
Organizations like LinkedIn, Google
or Facebook allow applications they don't own to use
their identity provider.
If you've ever used a sign in with button,
you've seen OpenID Connect in action.
The standard is also used in enterprise scenarios,
where identity providers are used to authenticate users
for an organization's entire suite of applications.
When we refer to an identity provider,
we're referring to an authorization server
that meets OIDC standards.
To satisfy these standards, authorization servers
must expose a new user info endpoint,
in addition to the authorization
and token endpoints specified
in the OAuth two specification.
This endpoint allows the client to pass an access token
to it and in return, provides identity information
about the resource owner.
OpenID Connect also returns a new structured ID token,
in addition to the access token from the token endpoint.
It contains standard claims about the authentication event
and the user's identity represented in a jot.
The authorization code flow
only changes slightly within OIDC.
There's just a few key additions.
In the initial redirect, the client adds the OpenID scope
to create an authentication request.
The redirect sends the resource owner
to the identity provider where they're authenticated
and consent to the client accessing their profile.
After this, the flow continues just like it does
in regular OAuth.
And the authorization code is provided to the client.
Finally, when the client exchanges the authorization code
with the identity provider, it receives an ID token,
in addition to the access token.
The identity token, which is in jot format,
contains a standard set of claims that provide information
regarding the authentication event, the token issuer,
the end-user and the token expiration.
There's also three optional claims that can be included.
Since the ID token is a jot,
it contains a cryptographic signature
that protects the token from being tampered with.
Identity tokens should only be used by clients
and should not be used for API access.
To establish user identity within a microservice,
the access token can be passed
to the identity provider's user info endpoint
to receive claims with information about the end-user.
This allows the micro-service to get information
about the end-user.
To see OpenID connect in action,
we can use the OpenID Connect playground provided by AuthO.
This tool allows us to step through each request
in the open ID connect authentication flow.
The authentication flow is very similar
to OAuth's authorization code flow.
There's just a few key differences.
Here we see the first step in the authentication flow,
which is to create an authentication request.
To do that, we need to make sure
that we specify the OpenID scope within the request.
This prompts the identity provider
to authenticate the end-user.
We're also able to provide more granular scopes,
like profile, email, phone and address.
These are going to provide the client
with access to information on the end-user's profile.
So once we've constructed the authentication request,
we can send it to the authorization endpoint.
This is going to redirect the end-user
and cause them to authenticate.
So here, I'm going to authenticate with Google,
using an account that I created specifically
for the situation.
So we'll just enter in the credentials.
Okay, now after we authenticate, a code is returned back
to the client.
The client can then exchange that code for an access token
and an ID token.
So let's go ahead and we're going to perform that exchange.
And you'll notice that when we get the response back,
we get an ID token and then, there's also an access token.
Now, if we take a closer look at the ID token,
you'll notice it starts with EYJ, that's a jot.
Once we hit next, we're given the opportunity
to verify the ID token.
We can see that it was signed using the HS256 algorithm.
So if we click on the verify button,
we can verify the integrity of the claims within that jot.
And we're also able to see them decoded.
So if we take a look at those claims,
you'll see information about the end-user.
You can see when they were authenticated,
you can see the client that sent them there
and then you're going
to get the standard OpenID Connect claims,
here towards the bottom.
So you can see how OpenID Connect augments OAuth
to provide a useful identity layer on top of the protocol.
The capabilities that are provided by this layer,
especially the identity token and user info endpoint,
provide an extremely useful specification
for establishing a user context across microservices.